# About this Project

This website is the product of the WorldFAIR D3.2 project, one of three deliverables under WP3 developed by the 
International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry ([IUPAC](https://iupac.org/)) for the 
[WorldFAIR](https://worldfair-project.eu/) project. The IUPAC FAIR Chemistry Cookbook is intended to support the 
chemistry community in understanding what FAIR is and how chemists can be enabled to be FAIRer moving forward. In 
addition, the site is intended to be a living resource by addition of new content as the area of FAIR evolves and 
encouraging the chemistry community to contribute new content.

## WorldFAIR D3.2 Objective
FAIR chemical data needs to be machine-readable, and this can be an unfamiliar scenario for many researchers and other 
stakeholders involved with publishing and managing experimental data. An advantage in the Cloud environment is the 
availability of readily accessible online tools for working with digital content. Even using workflow tools such as 
Electronic Laboratory Notebooks, there will always be some additional tasks to meet data sharing requirements. 
Explanatory information is increasingly available for the FAIR Data Principles and data sharing, and IUPAC provides 
extensive documentation on various standards for representing chemical information. However, very few practical 
resources exist that actively demonstrate how to manage various tasks associated with preparing data files for 
publication that will align with the technical criteria for FAIR machine-readable data. 

This project aims to develop an online community resource of practical and re-usable training materials that 
demonstrate how to manage digital data files and content. The overall goal is to get practical tools & tips in the 
hands of practicing chemists to lower barriers and smooth the adoption of best practices for sharing and re-using 
FAIR chemical data. 

## WorldFAIR D3.2 Scope of Work
The main scope of work will be to develop actionable recipes in the format of a digital Cookbook for how to prepare 
and deposit FAIR machine-enabled chemical data, identify and extract chemically relevant metadata, and compile and 
validate chemical data files using online tools. The Cookbook will be an open, collaborative, community focused 
resource based on a broadly accessible online dynamic platform (e.g., Jupyter Book) that will support the development 
and publication of executable content. The content will cover a range of activities for working with FAIR chemical 
data likely to be encountered by researchers, data scientists and many other stakeholders engaged in publishing and 
re-using chemical data. Best practices for using standards and tools will be emphasized and the resource will include 
instructions for how to contribute materials.