book/samples/learn_spectra.md, before:

# FAIR formating of (multi, hyper)spectral data

```{dropdown} About this interactive ![icons](../images/rocket.png) recipe
- Author: 
- Reviewer: 
- Topics: 
- Format: 
- Skills:
- Learning outcomes:  After completing this example you should understand:
- Citation: 'FAIR formating of (multi, hyper)spectral data', The IUPAC FAIR Chemistry Cookbook, https://iupac.github.io/WFChemCookbook/samples/learn_spectra.html
- Reuse: This notebook is made available under a [CC-BY-4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) license.
```

Spectral data are common in many domains and may arise from a variety of instruments and instrumental techniques. In many cases, a spectrum is a table of observed values as a single variable changes (wavelength, time, mass-charge ratio...) but in other cases can be more complex as or the number of variables or the resolution increases. 

### What data?

- Raw
- Processed
- Peak list
- ROI


### What metadata?

- Authorship
- Instrument
- Procedure/technique
- Sample


### A simple minimal approach

XML+CSV


### A pool of formats (some are FAIRer than others)

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3518119/

- JCAMP-DX
- mzML
- msp


### Checking the databases

- PubChem
- MassBank
- ChemSpider


### Some helpful software

Commit message:

WFChemCookbook-19 Revisions to Cookbook Sampler prior to release - revision of the citation text in all recipes - normalization of the metadata elements in the recipe header sections

book/samples/learn_spectra.md, after:

# FAIR formating of (multi, hyper)spectral data

```{dropdown} About this recipe
- Author(s): 
- Reviewer: 
- Topic(s): 
- Format(s): 
- Skill(s):
- Learning outcomes:  After completing this example you should understand:
- Citation: We will not be providing citations for the sampler, but citations for recipes will be available (with copy button) in the full release of the Cookbook and will include DOI’s. 
- Reuse: This notebook is made available under a [CC-BY-4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) license.
```

Spectral data are common in many domains and may arise from a variety of instruments and instrumental techniques. In many cases, a spectrum is a table of observed values as a single variable changes (wavelength, time, mass-charge ratio...) but in other cases can be more complex as or the number of variables or the resolution increases. 

### What data?

- Raw
- Processed
- Peak list
- ROI


### What metadata?

- Authorship
- Instrument
- Procedure/technique
- Sample


### A simple minimal approach

XML+CSV


### A pool of formats (some are FAIRer than others)

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3518119/

- JCAMP-DX
- mzML
- msp


### Checking the databases

- PubChem
- MassBank
- ChemSpider


### Some helpful software
