book/samples/PrepChemicalDataforSharing.md, before:

# Preparing Chemical Data for FAIR Sharing - A Minimalist Approach

```{dropdown} About this how to
- Author: [Ye Li](https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8361-6916)
- Reviewer:
- Topics: Chemical data, FAIR, formatting
- Format: Markdown file
- Scenarios: I need to share my data in a FAIR way
- Skills: You should be familiar with
    - [Identifiers](https://www.ibm.com/topics/api)
- Learning outcomes: After completing this example you should understand:
    - Understand what it will take to make your data FAIR
- Citation: 'How to: Preparing Chemical Data for FAIR Sharing - A Minimalist Approach', The IUPAC FAIR Chemistry Cookbook, https://iupac.github.io/WFChemCookbook/samples/PrepChemicalDataforSharing.html
- Reuse: This notebook is made available under a [CC-BY-4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) license.
```

## The Spectrum of FAIRness for Chemical Data

## (Minimal) Components for FAIR Chemical Data
- Openly shared in a proper data repository 
- Data available in an open (standard) format (and in the original format from the instruments) 
- READEME file to document
    - globally unique, citable, and persistent identifiers (PID, e.g., ORCID, InChI)
    - affiliated article citation
    - methods and other technical details
    - dataset structure and organization
    - license and term of use

### Check list

## Steps to prepare your chemical data for FAIR sharing 

### Flowchart

### Structure and organization of chemical data package

## Examples of FAIR chemical data package in the minimalist approach

Commit message:

WFChemCookbook-19 Revisions to Cookbook Sampler prior to release - revision of the citation text in all recipes - normalization of the metadata elements in the recipe header sections

book/samples/PrepChemicalDataforSharing.md, after:

# Preparing Chemical Data for FAIR Sharing - A Minimalist Approach

```{dropdown} About this recipe
- Author(s): [Ye Li](https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8361-6916)
- Reviewer:
- Topic(s): Chemical data, FAIR, formatting
- Format(s): Markdown file
- Scenario(s): I need to share my data in a FAIR way
- Skill(s): You should be familiar with
    - [Identifiers](https://www.ibm.com/topics/api)
- Learning outcomes: After completing this example you should understand:
    - Understand what it will take to make your data FAIR
- Citation: We will not be providing citations for the sampler, but citations for recipes will be available (with copy button) in the full release of the Cookbook and will include DOI’s. 
- Reuse: This notebook is made available under a [CC-BY-4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) license.
```

## The Spectrum of FAIRness for Chemical Data

## (Minimal) Components for FAIR Chemical Data
- Openly shared in a proper data repository 
- Data available in an open (standard) format (and in the original format from the instruments) 
- READEME file to document
    - globally unique, citable, and persistent identifiers (PID, e.g., ORCID, InChI)
    - affiliated article citation
    - methods and other technical details
    - dataset structure and organization
    - license and term of use

### Check list

## Steps to prepare your chemical data for FAIR sharing 

### Flowchart

### Structure and organization of chemical data package

## Examples of FAIR chemical data package in the minimalist approach
