book/about_cookbook.md, before:

# About this Cookbook

The IUPAC FAIR Chemistry Cookbook is intended to be an open, collaborative, community focused resource on working with 
FAIR data in chemistry. This community resource aims to provide a range of practical and re-usable training materials 
that demonstrate how to manage digital data files and content. Our goal is to get more practical tools & tips in the 
hands of practicing chemists and others working with digital chemical data, to lower barriers and smooth the adoption 
of best practices for sharing and reusing FAIR chemical data. The content primarily consists of actionable recipes 
for a range of tasks to prepare and deposit FAIR machine-enabled chemical data, identify and extract chemically 
relevant metadata, and compile and validate chemical data files using online tools. 

FAIR data are findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable for machine processing {cite:p}`Wilkinson2016`. 
FAIR chemical data need to be machine-readable, and this can be an unfamiliar scenario for many researchers and 
other stakeholders involved with publishing and managing experimental data. This cookbook aims to support best 
practices for sharing and reusing chemical data aligned with the technical criteria for FAIR machine-readable 
data. Practical, interactive tutorials based on common workflows and readily accessible online tools for 
working with digital content augment broader guidance. 

The IUPAC FAIR Chemistry Cookbook is designed to be an evolving resource for the chemistry community. It is 
supported by the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) as part of the
WorldFAIR Initiative (see About this project).

Commit message:

update to the about the cookbook text

book/about_cookbook.md, after:

# About this Cookbook


The IUPAC FAIR Chemistry Cookbook aims to provide a range of practical and re-usable training materials that demonstrate 
how to manage digital data files and content. The scope covers protocols that address machine-readable data pertaining 
to chemicals and techniques for working with data programmatically. Recipes are developed by active community members and 
target different tasks across a range of possible use cases for handling chemical data. Materials are presented with 
relevant chemistry examples, point to external content that are of high quality where available, and reference IUPAC 
and community digital standards where appropriate.

FAIR data are findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable for machine processing [Wil16]. FAIR chemical data need 
to be machine-readable, and this can be an unfamiliar scenario for many researchers and other stakeholders involved with 
publishing and managing experimental data. Students need to learn how to navigate the scale and range of data types and 
sources becoming available, extract meaning and insight from aggregations of data programmatically, and apply automated 
approaches to curation, dissemination, and analysis. This cookbook aims to support best practices for sharing and reusing 
chemical data aligned with the technical criteria for FAIR machine-readable data. Practical, interactive tutorials based 
on common workflows and readily accessible online tools for working with digital content augment broader guidance on 
FAIR and data standards. 

This community repository of interactive tutorials provides hands-on experience with a range of digital data sources, 
tools and workflows pertaining to automated chemical data processing. Digital notebooks with executable code blocks a
llow users to engage directly with basic cheminformatics functions integral to working with machine-readable data. 
The cookbook platform can be readily accessed and used through broadly available online infrastructure and recipes are 
designed to exemplify the FAIR principles for reuse.
