book/school.md, before:

# FAIR basics for Chemistry 

This section will include background on the FAIR data principles with specific reference to chemical data standards and critical issues to keep in mind when working with chemical data description, including topics listed below. 

**FAIR data principles for Chemistry**
* Findable with chemical identifiers
* Accessible with chemistry repositories 
* Interoperable with chemistry data formats 
* Reusable with validated notation  

**Machine-readable chemical data** 
* Chemical samples and chemical representation
* Chemical property measurements

**Annotating chemical data** 
* Associating chemical structures with characterization data 
* Multi-component chemical systems

**Data file issues in Chemistry**  
* Open vs. proprietary 
* Data format conversion 
* Archival formats   

This material will be informed by the [WorldFAIR Chemistry D3.1 project](https://iupac.org/project/2022-027-1-024) related to Reporting Guidance for FAIR chemical data and other community resources, including the [NDFI4Chem Knowledgebase](https://knowledgebase.nfdi4chem.de/knowledge_base/) and the [ELIXIR FAIR Cookbook](https://faircookbook.elixir-europe.org/).

Commit message:

adding a coming soon message to .md files outside the Sample Recipes categoriy

book/school.md, after:

> **This is an outline of the section. Detailed content is coming soon.** 
# FAIR basics for Chemistry 

This section will include background on the FAIR data principles with specific reference to chemical data standards and critical issues to keep in mind when working with chemical data description, including topics listed below. 

**FAIR data principles for Chemistry**
* Findable with chemical identifiers
* Accessible with chemistry repositories 
* Interoperable with chemistry data formats 
* Reusable with validated notation  

**Machine-readable chemical data** 
* Chemical samples and chemical representation
* Chemical property measurements

**Annotating chemical data** 
* Associating chemical structures with characterization data 
* Multi-component chemical systems

**Data file issues in Chemistry**  
* Open vs. proprietary 
* Data format conversion 
* Archival formats   

This material will be informed by the [WorldFAIR Chemistry D3.1 project](https://iupac.org/project/2022-027-1-024) related to Reporting Guidance for FAIR chemical data and other community resources, including the [NDFI4Chem Knowledgebase](https://knowledgebase.nfdi4chem.de/knowledge_base/) and the [ELIXIR FAIR Cookbook](https://faircookbook.elixir-europe.org/).
